# For knowing if the cache is enabled

1. Run `mysql> show variables like 'have_query_cache'`

The return has to be:

```
+------------------+-------+
| Variable_name    | Value |
+------------------+-------+
| have_query_cache | YES   |
+------------------+-------+
```

2. Run `mysql> show variables like 'query_cache'`

The return will be:

```
+------------------------------+---------+
| Variable_name                | Value   |
+------------------------------+---------+
| query_alloc_block_size       | 8192    |
| query_cache_limit            | 1048576 |
| query_cache_min_res_unit     | 4096    |
| query_cache_size             | 8388608 |
| query_cache_type             | ON      |
| query_cache_wlock_invalidate | OFF     |
| query_prealloc_size          | 8192    |
+------------------------------+---------+
```
For the cache being enabled is needed:
	- *query_cache_size* > 0
	- *query_cache_type* = ON
	- *query_cache_limit* > 0

# How does the MySQL cache work?

According to [MySQL docs](http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/query-cache.html):

> The query cache stores the text of a SELECT statement together with the corresponding result
that was sent to the client. If an identical statement is received later, the server retrieves
the results from the query cache rather than parsing and executing the statement again. 
The query cache is shared among sessions, so a result set generated by one client can be 
sent in response to the same query issued by another client.

It stores the result of queries with a result bigger than *query_cache_min_res_unit* ([the units are bytes](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/2226997/query-cache-min-res-unit-what-is-it-and-what-does-it-do/2227050#2227050)).

Every time there's a modification of the data invloved in the cached queries, there's a flush of the cache to get the new values.
This makes that caching MySQL is only efficient if the writes are not done too often.

Queries must be *exactly* the same (byte for byte) to be seen as identical (the cache is case sensitive).

The queries are cached according to the *query_cache_type*. Besides, the query cache uses a least recently used (LRU) 
strategy to decide which queries to remove from the cache.


# MySQL caching recomendations

For the previous reason, is it not recomended big query cache sizes. Because as bigger the cache size the most the db spends flushing
and locking. 

Good cache sizes would be *[between 100 and 200 mb](https://haydenjames.io/mysql-query-cache-size-performance/)* top.


## What's locking?

According to [MySQL manual glosary about locking](http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/glossary.html#glos_locking):

> The system of protecting a transaction from seeing or changing data that is being queried or changed by other transactions.
The locking strategy must balance reliability and consistency of database operations (the principles of the ACID philosophy)
against the performance needed for good concurrency. Fine-tuning the locking strategy often involves choosing an isolation
level and ensuring all your database operations are safe and reliable for that isolation level.

I fund a further explanation on a [blog post](https://www.percona.com/blog/2012/09/05/write-contentions-on-the-query-cache/).

> The answer is in the way the query cache works. Simply stated, the server wants to lock
the query cache both when checking if a result is in the cache and when writing a result 
set into the cache. When writing, locking can occur several times: the server sends results
to the cache before computing the entire result set (so the total size of the result set is
not known), so the cache has to assign memory block by block. If a block is full and the 
server keeps sending rows, a new block must be assigned, requiring the cache to be locked!

Aditionally on the [MySQL documentation about query-cache-tread-states](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.5/en/query-cache-thread-states.html):

> **Waiting for query cache lock**: 
> This state occurs while a session is waiting to take the query cache lock. This can happen for any statement that needs to perform some query cache operation, such as an INSERT or DELETE that invalidates the query cache, a SELECT that looks for a cached entry, RESET QUERY CACHE, and so forth.  

## Query cache SELECT Options

* **SQL_CACHE** : The query will be cached
* **SQL_NO_CACHE**: The query will not be cached

Usage:
```
SELECT SQL_CACHE id, name FROM customer;
SELECT SQL_NO_CACHE id, name FROM customer;
```
[source](http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/query-cache-in-select.html)

## query_cache_type
* *0* or *OFF* → prevents caching
* *1* → enables chaching except of those statements that begin with `SELECT SQL_NO_CACHE`
* *2* → enables caching only for the queries with `SELECT SQL_CACHE`

# Interest resources

* [Speed Up Your Web Site With MySQL Query Caching](http://www.howtogeek.com/howto/programming/speed-up-your-web-site-with-mysql-query-caching/)
* [Avoid This When Tuning MySQL Query Cache for Performance](https://haydenjames.io/mysql-query-cache-size-performance/)

